---
title: 'KNN to clasify the IRIS dataset, using numpy.'
date: 2022-08-28
permalink: /posts/2022/07/python_euclid_extended/
tags:
  - Python
  - Machine Learning
---

The [IRIS dataset](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/iris) is a dataset which consists of measurements taken from various flowers such as
the petal length and width, as well as the species of that flower. It can be downloaded from [here](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/iris/) as a .data file, and opened as a numpy array in python like so:

```python
# Imports + setting seed
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import random as r
r.seed(1)

# Load the data
data =  pd.read_csv('iris.data', sep=",")
data = data.to_numpy()  
```

Note that whilst the loading uses pandas, the actual code for creating the AI will be done exclusively with numpy and python - so, without further ado, what AI will we be creating?

Today, we will be building a K-nearest-neighbours (KNN) algorithm. The core idea of KNN is "if 2 datapoints look similar, they are similar" and we will be taking some time to expand upon this mathematically. To start, we need to somehow quantify this similarity mathematically. One way to do this is with a [distance function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_(mathematics)). Distance functions are a way of assigning a real number to two elements of a set. Intuitively, they are a way of measuring how similar 2 elements of a set are - making them ideal to try classify our flowers, as we can reasonably expect flowers of the same species to be similar to each other, and flowers of the same species to be different to each other. For now, let's just use the euclidean distance, defined mathematically for vectors \\(A,B\\) as:

\\[ \sqrt{\sum^n_{i=1}(a_i - b_i)^2}, \text{ for } a_{1,...,n},b_{1,...,n} \in A,B. \\]

And in python as:

```python
# Euclidean distance
def euc_dist(A,B):
    return np.sqrt(np.sum(np.square(A-B)))
```

Now we've done this, we can work towards using this distance function within KNN. Let's say there is some flower that we want to classify using KNN, which in the code we will refer to as test_images[j]. 
